.TH "esl-alistat" 1  "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP
esl-alistat - summarize a multiple sequence alignment file

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B esl-alistat
.I [options]
.I msafile

.SH DESCRIPTION

.pp
.B esl-alistat 
summarizes the contents of the multiple sequence alignment(s) in 
.I msafile, 
such as the alignment name, format, alignment length (number of
aligned columns), number of sequences, average pairwise % identity,
and mean, smallest, and largest raw (unaligned) lengths of the
sequences.

If 
.I msafile
is - (a single dash),
multiple alignment input is read from
.I stdin.

The alignments can be of protein or DNA/RNA sequences. All alignments
in the same 
.I msafile
must be either protein or DNA/RNA. The alphabet will be autodetected
unless one of the options 
.I --amino,
.I --dna,
or 
.I --rna 
are given. These options may be useful in automated
pipelines to make 
.B esl-alistat 
more robust; alphabet autodetection is not infallible.

The 
.B --small
option allows summarizing alignments without storing them in memory
and can be useful for large alignment files with sizes that approach
or exceed the amount of available RAM.  When
.B --small
is used, 
.B esl-alistat
will print fewer statistics on the alignment, omitting data on the
smallest and largest sequences and the average identity of the
alignment.
.B --small
only works on Pfam formatted alignments (a special type of
non-interleaved Stockholm alignment in which each sequence occurs on a
single line) and 
.BI --informat " pfam"
must be given with
.B --small.
Further, when 
.B --small
is used, the alphabet must be specified with
.I --amino,
.I --dna,
or 
.I --rna.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h 
Print brief help;  includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP 
.B -1
Use a tabular output format with one line of statistics per alignment
in 
.I msafile.
This is most useful when
.I msafile
contains many different alignments (such as a Pfam database in
Stockholm format).


.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.B --amino
Assert that the 
.I msafile 
contains protein sequences. 

.TP 
.B --dna
Assert that the 
.I msafile 
contains DNA sequences. 

.TP 
.B --rna
Assert that the 
.I msafile 
contains RNA sequences. 

.TP 
.B --small
Operate in small memory mode for Pfam formatted alignments.
.BI --informat " pfam"
and one of
.B --amino,
.B --dna,
or
.B --rna
must be given as well.

.SH AUTHOR

Easel and its documentation are @EASEL_COPYRIGHT@.
@EASEL_LICENSE@.
See COPYING in the source code distribution for more details.
The Easel home page is: @EASEL_URL@
